doc/HUFFMAN.md, before:

<!--
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2024 Thomas Mathys
SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
-->

# Huffman encoding/decoding in the GBA BIOS

This document contains some notes on the huffman encoding scheme
implemented the GBA BIOS.

## Terminology

Terminology is borrowed from ARM CPUs.
Moreover, little endianness is assumed everywhere.

|Term         |Description                                            |
|-------------|-------------------------------------------------------|
|Byte         |An 8 bit quantity                                      |
|Halfword     |A 16 bit quantity                                      |
|Word         |A 32 bit quantity                                      |
|node0, child0|Child node to follow when there is a 0 in the bitstream|
|node1, child1|Child node to follow when there is a 1 in the bitstream|

## Huffman tree serialization

The serialized huffman tree is best viewed as an array of halfwords,
where each array element holds two sibling nodes.

The array element at index 0 is special: rather than a pair of
sibling nodes it stores the size of the serialized tree and
the root node.

Since each sibling node pair is stored in a halfword, each node is
stored in a byte. So a leaf node has 8 bits to store the symbol
it represents. With 8 bit symbols this leaves no room in a node to
store the node's type. That information is stored in the parent node.
The root node is implicitly assumed to be an internal node.

### Format of internal nodes

TODO: describe it (What about the offset?)

|Bit 7      |Bit 6      |Bits 0 - 5        |
|-----------|-----------|------------------|
|child0 type|child1 type|Offset to children|

Bits 6 and 7 store the type of the internal node's child nodes,
where 0 means the respective child is an internal node and 1 means
it is a leaf node.

### Format of leaf nodes

TODO: describe it (what about upper unused bits?)

Commit message:

Document format of leaf nodes [no ci]

doc/HUFFMAN.md, after:

<!--
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2024 Thomas Mathys
SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
-->

# Huffman encoding/decoding in the GBA BIOS

This document contains some notes on the huffman encoding scheme
implemented the GBA BIOS.

## Terminology

Terminology is borrowed from ARM CPUs.
Moreover, little endianness is assumed everywhere.

|Term         |Description                                            |
|-------------|-------------------------------------------------------|
|Byte         |An 8 bit quantity                                      |
|Halfword     |A 16 bit quantity                                      |
|Word         |A 32 bit quantity                                      |
|node0, child0|Child node to follow when there is a 0 in the bitstream|
|node1, child1|Child node to follow when there is a 1 in the bitstream|

## Huffman tree serialization

The serialized huffman tree is best viewed as an array of halfwords,
where each array element holds two sibling nodes.

The array element at index 0 is special: rather than a pair of
sibling nodes it stores the size of the serialized tree and
the root node.

Since each sibling node pair is stored in a halfword, each node is
stored in a byte. So a leaf node has 8 bits to store the symbol
it represents. With 8 bit symbols this leaves no room in a node to
store the node's type. That information is stored in the parent node.
The root node is implicitly assumed to be an internal node.

### Format of internal nodes

TODO: describe it (What about the offset?)

|Bit 7      |Bit 6      |Bits 0 - 5        |
|-----------|-----------|------------------|
|child0 type|child1 type|Offset to children|

Bits 6 and 7 store the type of the internal node's child nodes,
where 0 means the respective child is an internal node and 1 means
it is a leaf node.

### Format of leaf nodes

|Bits 0 - 7                             |
|---------------------------------------|
|The symbol represented by the leaf node|

When the symbol size is less than 8 bits, the upper unused bits must
be zero.
